

Handling Domains with Different Materials
=========================================

.. index:: heterogeneous media


.. index:: multi-material domain


Solving PDEs in domains made up of different materials is a frequently
encountered task. In FEniCS, these kind of problems are handled by
defining subdomains inside the domain. The subdomains may represent
the various materials. We can thereafter define material properties
through functions, known in FEniCS as *mesh functions*, that are
piecewise constant in each subdomain.  A simple example with two
materials (subdomains) in 2D will demonstrate the basic steps in the
process.
.. Later, a multi-material

.. problem in :math:`d` space dimensions is addressed.


.. _tut:possion:2D:2mat:problem:

Working with Two Subdomains
---------------------------


Suppose we want to solve

.. math::
   :label: tut:poisson:2D:2mat:varcoeff2

            \nabla\cdot \left\lbrack k(x,y)\nabla u(x,y)\right\rbrack = 0,


in a domain :math:`\Omega` consisting of two subdomains where
:math:`k` takes on a different value in each subdomain.  For
simplicity, yet without loss of generality, we choose for the current
implementation the domain :math:`\Omega = [0,1]\times [0,1]` and
divide it into two equal subdomains,

.. math::

        \Omega_0 = [0, 1]\times [0,1/2],\quad
        \Omega_1 = [0, 1]\times (1/2,1]\thinspace .


We define :math:`k(x,y)=k_0` in :math:`\Omega_0` and
:math:`k(x,y)=k_1` in :math:`\Omega_1`, where :math:`k_0>0` and
:math:`k_1>0` are given constants.  As boundary conditions, we choose
:math:`u=0` at :math:`y=0`, :math:`u=1` at :math:`y=1`, and
:math:`\partial u/\partial n=0` at :math:`x=0` and :math:`x=1`.  One
can show that the exact solution is now given by

.. math::

        u(x, y) = \left\lbrace\begin{array}{ll}
        {2yk_1\over k_0+k_1}, & y \leq 1/2\\
        {(2y-1)k_0 + k_1\over k_0+k_1}, & y \geq 1/2
        \end{array}\right.


As long as the element boundaries coincide with the internal boundary
:math:`y=1/2`, this piecewise linear solution should be exactly
recovered by Lagrange elements of any degree. We use this property to
verify the implementation.

Physically, the present problem may correspond to heat conduction,
where the heat conduction in :math:`\Omega_1` is ten times more
efficient than in :math:`\Omega_0`. An alternative interpretation is
flow in porous media with two geological layers, where the layers'
ability to transport the fluid differs by a factor of 10.

.. _tut:possion:2D:2mat:impl:

Implementation (3)
------------------


.. index:: boundary specification (class)


.. index:: mat2_p2D.py

The new functionality in this subsection regards how to define the
subdomains :math:`\Omega_0` and :math:`\Omega_1`. For this purpose we
need to use subclasses of class ``SubDomain``, not only plain
functions as we have used so far for specifying boundaries. Consider
the boundary function

.. code-block:: python

        def boundary(x, on_boundary):
            tol = 1E-14
            return on_boundary and abs(x[0]) < tol

for defining the boundary :math:`x=0`. Instead of using such a
stand-alone function, we can create an instance (or object) of a
subclass of ``SubDomain``, which implements the ``inside`` method as
an alternative to the ``boundary`` function:

.. code-block:: python

        class Boundary(SubDomain):
            def inside(self, x, on_boundary):
                tol = 1E-14
                return on_boundary and abs(x[0]) < tol

        boundary = Boundary()
        bc = DirichletBC(V, Constant(0), boundary)

A word about computer science terminology may be used here: The term
*instance* means a Python object of a particular type (such as
``SubDomain``, ``Function`` ``FunctionSpace``, etc.).  Many use
*instance* and *object* as interchangeable terms. In other computer
programming languages one may also use the term *variable* for the
same thing.  We mostly use the well-known term *object* in this text.

A subclass of ``SubDomain`` with an ``inside`` method offers
functionality for marking parts of the domain or the boundary. Now we
need to define one class for the subdomain :math:`\Omega_0` where
:math:`y\leq 1/2` and another for the subdomain :math:`\Omega_1` where
:math:`y\geq 1/2`:

.. code-block:: python

        class Omega0(SubDomain):
            def inside(self, x, on_boundary):
                return True if x[1] <= 0.5 else False

        class Omega1(SubDomain):
            def inside(self, x, on_boundary):
                return True if x[1] >= 0.5 else False

Notice the use of ``<=`` and ``>=`` in both tests. For a cell to
belong to, e.g., :math:`\Omega_1`, the ``inside`` method must return
``True`` for all the vertices ``x`` of the cell. So to make the cells
at the internal boundary :math:`y=1/2` belong to :math:`\Omega_1`, we
need the test ``x[1] >= 0.5``.

The next task is to use a ``MeshFunction`` to mark all cells in
:math:`\Omega_0` with the subdomain number 0 and all cells in
:math:`\Omega_1` with the subdomain number 1.  Our convention is to
number subdomains as :math:`0,1,2,\ldots`.

A ``MeshFunction`` is a discrete function that can be evaluated at a
set of so-called *mesh entities*. Examples of mesh entities are cells,
facets, and vertices. A ``MeshFunction`` over cells is suitable to
represent subdomains (materials), while a ``MeshFunction`` over facets
is used to represent pieces of external or internal boundaries.  Mesh
functions over vertices can be used to describe continuous fields.

Since we need to define subdomains of :math:`\Omega` in the present
example, we must make use of a ``MeshFunction`` over cells. The
``MeshFunction`` constructor is fed with three arguments: 1) the type
of value: ``'int'`` for integers, ``'uint'`` for positive (unsigned)
integers, ``'double'`` for real numbers, and ``'bool'`` for logical
values; 2) a ``Mesh`` object, and 3) the topological dimension of the
mesh entity in question: cells have topological dimension equal to the
number of space dimensions in the PDE problem, and facets have one
dimension lower.  Alternatively, the constructor can take just a
filename and initialize the ``MeshFunction`` from data in a file.

We start with creating a ``MeshFunction`` whose values are
non-negative integers (``'uint'``) for numbering the subdomains.  The
mesh entities of interest are the cells, which have dimension 2 in a
two-dimensional problem (1 in 1D, 3 in 3D). The appropriate code for
defining the ``MeshFunction`` for two subdomains then reads

.. code-block:: python

        subdomains = MeshFunction('uint', mesh, 2)
        # Mark subdomains with numbers 0 and 1
        subdomain0 = Omega0()
        subdomain0.mark(subdomains, 0)
        subdomain1 = Omega1()
        subdomain1.mark(subdomains, 1)


Calling ``subdomains.array()`` returns a ``numpy`` array of the
subdomain values. That is, ``subdomain.array()[i]`` is the subdomain
value of cell number ``i``. This array is used to look up the
subdomain or material number of a specific element.

We need a function ``k`` that is constant in each subdomain
:math:`\Omega_0` and :math:`\Omega_1`. Since we want ``k`` to be a
finite element function, it is natural to choose a space of functions
that are constant over each element.  The family of discontinuous
Galerkin methods, in FEniCS denoted by ``'DG'``, is suitable for this
purpose. Since we want functions that are piecewise constant, the
value of the degree parameter is zero:

.. code-block:: python

        V0 = FunctionSpace(mesh, 'DG', 0)
        k  = Function(V0)

To fill ``k`` with the right values in each element, we loop over all
cells (i.e., indices in ``subdomain.array()``), extract the
corresponding subdomain number of a cell, and assign the corresponding
:math:`k` value to the ``k.vector()`` array:

.. code-block:: python

        k_values = [1.5, 50]  # values of k in the two subdomains
        for cell_no in range(len(subdomains.array())):
            subdomain_no = subdomains.array()[cell_no]
            k.vector()[cell_no] = k_values[subdomain_no]


Long loops in Python are known to be slow, so for large meshes it is
preferable to avoid such loops and instead use *vectorized code*.
Normally this implies that the loop must be replaced by calls to
functions from the ``numpy`` library that operate on complete arrays
(in efficient C code). The functionality we want in the present case
is to compute an array of the same size as ``subdomain.array()``, but
where the value ``i`` of an entry in ``subdomain.array()`` is replaced
by ``k_values[i]``.  Such an operation is carried out by the ``numpy``
function ``choose``:

.. code-block:: python

        help = numpy.asarray(subdomains.array(), dtype=numpy.int32)
        k.vector()[:] = numpy.choose(help, k_values)

The ``help`` array is required since ``choose`` cannot work with
``subdomain.array()`` because this array has elements of type
``uint32``. We must therefore transform this array to an array
``help`` with standard ``int32`` integers.

Having the ``k`` function ready for finite element computations, we
can proceed in the normal manner with defining essential boundary
conditions, as in the section :ref:`tut:poisson:multiple:Dirichlet`,
and the :math:`a(u,v)` and :math:`L(v)` forms, as in the section
:ref:`tut:possion:2D:varcoeff`.  All the details can be found in the
file ``mat2_p2D.py``.


.. _tut:poisson:mat:neumann:

Multiple Neumann, Robin, and Dirichlet Condition
------------------------------------------------

.. index:: Dirichlet boundary conditions


.. index:: Neumann boundary conditions


.. index:: Robin boundary conditions


.. index:: boundary conditions


Let us go back to the model problem from the section
:ref:`tut:poisson:multiple:Dirichlet` where we had both Dirichlet and
Neumann conditions.  The term ``v*g*ds`` in the expression for ``L``
implies a boundary integral over the complete boundary, or in FEniCS
terms, an integral over all exterior facets.  However, the
contributions from the parts of the boundary where we have Dirichlet
conditions are erased when the linear system is modified by the
Dirichlet conditions.  We would like, from an efficiency point of
view, to integrate ``v*g*ds`` only over the parts of the boundary
where we actually have Neumann conditions.  And more importantly, in
other problems one may have different Neumann conditions or other
conditions like the Robin type condition.  With the mesh function
concept we can mark different parts of the boundary and integrate over
specific parts.  The same concept can also be used to treat multiple
Dirichlet conditions.  The forthcoming text illustrates how this is
done.

Essentially, we still stick to the model problem from the section
:ref:`tut:poisson:multiple:Dirichlet`, but replace the Neumann
condition at :math:`y=0` by a *Robin condition*:

.. math::

        -{\partial u\over\partial n} = p(u-q),


where :math:`p` and :math:`q` are specified functions.  The Robin
condition is most often used to model heat transfer to the
surroundings and arise naturally from Newton's cooling law.

Since we have prescribed a simple solution in our model problem,
:math:`u=1+x^2+2y^2`, we adjust :math:`p` and :math:`q` such that the
condition holds at :math:`y=0`. This implies that :math:`q=1+x^2+2y^2`
and :math:`p` can be arbitrary (the normal derivative at :math:`y=0`:
:math:`\partial u/\partial n = -\partial u/\partial y = -4y=0`).

Now we have four parts of the boundary: :math:`\Gamma_N` which
corresponds to the upper side :math:`y=1`, :math:`\Gamma_R` which
corresponds to the lower part :math:`y=0`, :math:`\Gamma_0` which
corresponds to the left part :math:`x=0`, and :math:`\Gamma_1` which
corresponds to the right part :math:`x=1`. The complete boundary-value
problem reads

.. math::

            - \nabla^2 u &= -6 \mbox{ in } \Omega, \\
            u &= u_L \mbox{ on } \Gamma_0, \\
            u &= u_R \mbox{ on } \Gamma_1, \\
            - {\partial u\over\partial n} &= p(u-q) \mbox{ on } \Gamma_R,
            \\
            - {\partial u\over\partial n} &= g \mbox{ on } \Gamma_N\thinspace .



The involved prescribed functions are :math:`u_L= 1 + 2y^2`,
:math:`u_R = 2 + 2y^2`, :math:`q=1+x^2+2y^2`, :math:`p` is arbitrary,
and :math:`g=-4y`.

Integration by parts of :math:`-\int_\Omega v\nabla^2 u \,
\mathrm{d}x` becomes as usual

.. math::

         -\int_\Omega v\nabla^2 u \, \mathrm{d}x
        = \int_\Omega\nabla u\cdot \nabla v \, \mathrm{d}x - \int_{\partial\Omega}{\partial u\over
        \partial n}v \, \mathrm{d}s\thinspace .


The boundary integral vanishes on :math:`\Gamma_0\cup\Gamma_1`, and we
split the parts over :math:`\Gamma_N` and :math:`\Gamma_R` since we
have different conditions at those parts:

.. math::

        - \int_{\partial\Omega}v{\partial u\over\partial n} \, \mathrm{d}s
        =
        -\int_{\Gamma_N}v{\partial u\over\partial n} \, \mathrm{d}s -
        \int_{\Gamma_R}v{\partial u\over\partial n} \, \mathrm{d}s
        = \int_{\Gamma_N}vg \, \mathrm{d}s +
        \int_{\Gamma_R}vp(u-q) \, \mathrm{d}s\thinspace .


The weak form then becomes

.. math::

        \int_{\Omega} \nabla u\cdot \nabla v \, \mathrm{d}x +
        \int_{\Gamma_N} gv \, \mathrm{d}s + \int_{\Gamma_R}p(u-q)v \, \mathrm{d}s
        = \int_{\Omega} fv \, \mathrm{d}x,


We want to write this weak form in the standard notation
:math:`a(u,v)=L(v)`, which requires that we identify all integrals
with *both* :math:`u` and :math:`v`, and collect these in
:math:`a(u,v)`, while the remaining integrals with :math:`v` and not
:math:`u` go into :math:`L(v)`.  The integral from the Robin condition
must of this reason be split in two parts:

.. math::
         \int_{\Gamma_R}p(u-q)v \, \mathrm{d}s
        = \int_{\Gamma_R}puv \, \mathrm{d}s - \int_{\Gamma_R}pqv \, \mathrm{d}s\thinspace .


We then have

.. math::

        a(u, v) &= \int_{\Omega} \nabla u\cdot \nabla v \, \mathrm{d}x
        + \int_{\Gamma_R}puv \, \mathrm{d}s,
        \\
        L(v) &= \int_{\Omega} fv \, \mathrm{d}x -
        \int_{\Gamma_N} g v \, \mathrm{d}s + \int_{\Gamma_R}pqv \, \mathrm{d}s\thinspace .


.. index:: dnr_p2D.py


A natural starting point for implementation is the ``dn2_p2D.py``
program in the directory ``stationary/poisson``. The new aspects are

  * definition of a mesh function over the boundary,

  * marking each side as a subdomain, using the mesh function,

  * splitting a boundary integral into parts.

Task 1 makes use of the ``MeshFunction`` object, but contrary to the
section :ref:`tut:possion:2D:2mat:impl`, this is not a function over
cells, but a function over cell facets. The topological dimension of
cell facets is one lower than the cell interiors, so in a
two-dimensional problem the dimension becomes 1. In general, the facet
dimension is given as ``mesh.topology().dim()-1``, which we use in the
code for ease of direct reuse in other problems.  The construction of
a ``MeshFunction`` object to mark boundary parts now reads

.. code-block:: python

        boundary_parts = \
          MeshFunction("uint", mesh, mesh.topology().dim()-1)

As in the section :ref:`tut:possion:2D:2mat:impl` we use a subclass of
``SubDomain`` to identify the various parts of the mesh
function. Problems with domains of more complicated geometries may set
the mesh function for marking boundaries as part of the mesh
generation.  In our case, the :math:`y=0` boundary can be marked by

.. code-block:: python

        class LowerRobinBoundary(SubDomain):
            def inside(self, x, on_boundary):
                tol = 1E-14   # tolerance for coordinate comparisons
                return on_boundary and abs(x[1]) < tol

        Gamma_R = LowerRobinBoundary()
        Gamma_R.mark(boundary_parts, 0)

The code for the :math:`y=1` boundary is similar and is seen in
``dnr_p2D.py``.

The Dirichlet boundaries are marked similarly, using subdomain number 2 for :math:`\Gamma_0` and 3 for :math:`\Gamma_1`:

.. code-block:: python

        class LeftBoundary(SubDomain):
            def inside(self, x, on_boundary):
                tol = 1E-14   # tolerance for coordinate comparisons
                return on_boundary and abs(x[0]) < tol

        Gamma_0 = LeftBoundary()
        Gamma_0.mark(boundary_parts, 2)

        class RightBoundary(SubDomain):
            def inside(self, x, on_boundary):
                tol = 1E-14   # tolerance for coordinate comparisons
                return on_boundary and abs(x[0] - 1) < tol

        Gamma_1 = RightBoundary()
        Gamma_1.mark(boundary_parts, 3)

Specifying the ``DirichletBC`` objects may now make use of the mesh
function (instead of a ``SubDomain`` subclass object) and an indicator
for which subdomain each condition should be applied to:

.. code-block:: python

        u_L = Expression('1 + 2*x[1]*x[1]')
        u_R = Expression('2 + 2*x[1]*x[1]')
        bcs = [DirichletBC(V, u_L, boundary_parts, 2),
               DirichletBC(V, u_R, boundary_parts, 3)]


Some functions need to be defined before we can go on with the ``a``
and ``L`` of the variational problem:

.. code-block:: python

        g = Expression('-4*x[1]')
        q = Expression('1 + x[0]*x[0] + 2*x[1]*x[1]')
        p = Constant(100)  # arbitrary function can go here
        u = TrialFunction(V)
        v = TestFunction(V)
        f = Constant(-6.0)


The new aspect of the variational problem is the two distinct boundary
integrals.  Having a mesh function over exterior cell facets (our
``boundary_parts`` object), where subdomains (boundary parts) are
numbered as :math:`0,1,2,\ldots`, the special symbol ``ds(0)`` implies
integration over subdomain (part) 0, ``ds(1)`` denotes integration
over subdomain (part) 1, and so on.  The idea of multiple `ds`-type
objects generalizes to volume integrals too: ``dx(0)``, ``dx(1)``,
etc., are used to integrate over subdomain 0, 1, etc., inside
:math:`\Omega`.

The variational problem can be defined as

.. code-block:: python

        a = inner(nabla_grad(u), nabla_grad(v))*dx + p*u*v*ds(0)
        L = f*v*dx - g*v*ds(1) + p*q*v*ds(0)

For the ``ds(0)`` and ``ds(1)`` symbols to work we must obviously
connect them (or ``a`` and ``L``) to the mesh function marking parts
of the boundary. This is done by a certain keyword argument to the
``assemble`` function:

.. code-block:: python

        A = assemble(a, exterior_facet_domains=boundary_parts)
        b = assemble(L, exterior_facet_domains=boundary_parts)

Then essential boundary conditions are enforced, and the system can be
solved in the usual way:

.. code-block:: python

        for bc in bcs:
            bc.apply(A, b)
        u = Function(V)
        U = u.vector()
        solve(A, U, b)

The complete code is in the ``dnr_p2D.py`` file in the
``stationary/poisson`` directory.


