


More Examples
=============

Many more topics could be treated in a FEniCS tutorial, e.g., how to
solve systems of PDEs, how to work with mixed finite element methods,
how to create more complicated meshes and mark boundaries, and how to
create more advanced visualizations.  However, to limit the size of
this tutorial, the examples end here.  There are, fortunately, a rich
set of FEniCS demos.  The FEniCS documentation explains a collection
of PDE solvers in detail: the Poisson equation, the mixed formulation
for the Poission equation, the Biharmonic equation, the equations of
hyperelasticity, the Cahn-Hilliard equation, and the incompressible
Navier-Stokes equations.  Both Python and C++ versions of these
solvers are explained.  An eigenvalue solver is also documented.  In
the ``dolfin/demo`` directory of the DOLFIN source code tree you can
find programs for these and many other examples, including the
advection-diffusion equation, the equations of elastodynamics, a
reaction-diffusion equation, various finite element methods for the
Stokes problem, discontinuous Galerkin methods for the Poisson and
advection-diffusion equations, and an eigenvalue problem arising from
electromagnetic waveguide problem with Nedelec elements.  There are
also numerous demos on how to apply various functionality in FEniCS,
e.g., mesh refinement and error control, moving meshes (for ALE
methods), computing functionals over subsets of the mesh (such as lift
and drag on bodies in flow), and creating separate subdomain meshes
from a parent mesh.

The project cbc.solve (`<https://launchpad.net/cbc.solve>`_) offers
more complete PDE solvers for the Navier-Stokes equations, the
equations of hyperelasticity, fluid-structure interaction, viscous
mantle flow, and the bidomain model of electrophysiology.  Most of
these solvers are described in the "FEniCS book" [FEniCS]_
(`<https://launchpad.net/fenics-book>`_).  Another project, cbc.rans
(`<https://launchpad.net/cbc.rans>`_), offers an environment for very
flexible and easy implementation of Navier-Stokes solvers and
turbulence [Mortensen2011]_ [Mortensen2011b]_. For example, cbc.rans
contains an elliptic relaxation model for turbulent flow involving 18
nonlinear PDEs.  FEniCS proved to be an ideal environment for
implementing such complicated PDE models.  The easy construction of
systems of nonlinear PDEs in cbc.rans has been further generalized to
simplify the implementation of large systems of nonlinear PDEs in
general.  The functionality is found in the cbc.pdesys package
(`<https://launchpad.net/cbcpdesys>`_).

